in this video
Let us see the implementation of binary search see this
example array with elements 10 23 45 70 100 111 and
123 suppose
We want to search for the key 45
So as we did for the book we will first
find the middle element
We have eight elements
So the fourth one is the middle one which is
It is not the key
And now we have to check if our key is
less than or greater than 70
And it is 45 less than 70
So it could only be present in the left half
So search here only and ignored the second half again
In this half
The middle one is the second element 23 again check
Whether 45 is less than or greater than 23 it
is greater than 23
So check in the right half only
And here we have one element and it is our key
So this is what binary search is
Now let us see it's implementation in C
So we have the function binary search here which will
take the array its start end and the key to be
searched into it and it will return one if the
key is found and it will return zero if it is
not found
So we passed this array It start index zero and
end index seven and key 45 into the function and
declare a variable mid
And we have this While loop here which will divide
the array into half till we find the key or
the array is completed
And when the key is found one is return And when
the array is completely checked this condition start less than end
will fail and control comes out of the loop and
returns
Zero so let us see in first iteration start zero is less
than end seventh
So go inside and find the middle element
So we have mid equal to start plus end divided
by two
That is zero plus seven by two
Which is three now check
If the middle element is the key
So we have if arr of mid equal to key
and it is not the check whether we should search
in the left half or the right half
So we have if arr of mid less than key and
it is not so 70 is actually greater than 45 so
we should only check in the left half so start
should be the same
Index zero but end should be mid minus one
So in else we have end equal to mid minus
one that is three minus one which is equal to
two
Now check The condition
Again we have start zero less than end two
So the condition is okay
So go inside and find the new middle element
So we have mid equal to start plus and divided
by two that is zero plus two divided by two
which is equal to one So check If middle element
is a key and we have arr of mid equal to
key but it is not so Next step is to
find the half were key could be present
So check if arr of mid is less than key
and 23 is less than 45
So we should check in the right half only so
end will be the same But start should be mid
plus one
so start equal to one plus one which is
equal to two Now Check the while condition and two
is equal to two
So the condition is okay
So find the new middle element
It is two plus two divided by two which is
two now check if middle element equal to key and it
is so returned one as the key is found
This is how it works
And always remember binary search will work only for sorted
arrays
Now in the same array let us search for the key
So first find mid which will be zero plus seven
divided by two that is three now Chek if middle
element is the key and it is not so check
whether to go to left side or right side
So we have If arr of mid less than key
and 70 is less than 150
So we should check in the right half so end
will be the same but start will be mid plus
one that is three plus one which is equal to
four Now check the while condition and start four is
less than end seven
So go inside and find the new mid which is
four plus seven divided by two that is 11 by two
which is equal to five
So middle element is that index five So check If
it is the key
So we have
If arr of mid equal to key and it is
not so check if arr of mid is less than key
and 100 is less than 150
So if the element is present it could only be
present in the right half
so set start equal to mid plus one that is five
plus one which is equal to six now check the
condition and six is less than seven
So go inside and find the new mid
And it will be six plus seven divided by two
That is 13 by two which is equal to six
So check if it is the key
So we have if arr of mid equal to key
and it is not so check whether to go to
left site or right side
And we have If arr of mid less than key and
111 is less than 150 so it could be
present in the right half
Only so set start equal to mid plus one that is
six plus one which is equal to seven and check
The wild condition in seven is equal to seven
So condition is okay
So go inside and find mid which will
be seven plus seven divided by two
That is seven so
check if that is a key and it is not
so check whether to go to left or right
So we have
If arr of mid less than key and 123
is less than 150 so 150 could
only be present in the right side
So set start equal to mid plus one that is seven
plus one which is equal to eight now chek the
while condition and eight is not less than or equal
to seven
So the condition fails
It simply means we have completed checking the array and now
there is no chance that the key is present in
the array
so control comes out of the while loop and returns zero
as the key is not found.